# Network forensics and NetworkMiner                            

Network forensics is a specific subdomain of the Forensics domain, and it  focuses on network traffic investigation. Network forensics discipline  covers the work done to access information transmitted by listening and  investigating live and recorded traffic, gathering evidence/artefacts  and understanding potential problems. 

Briefly, it is the action of recording packets of network traffic and creating investigatable sources and establishing a root–cause analysis of an  event. The ultimate goal is to provide sufficient information to detect  malicious activities, security breaches, policy/regulation compliance,  system health and user behaviour.

The investigation process identifies communicated hosts in terms of time, frequency, protocol, application and data.

The investigation tries to answer the **5W**;

- Who (Source IP and port)
- What (Data/payload)
- Where (Destination IP and port)
- When (Time and data)
- Why (How/What happened)

**Note that** the network evidence capture and investigation process should be  systematic. Having enough data and the right timeline capture for a  successful Network forensics investigation is crucial.

## Network forensics use cases

- **Network discovery:** Discovering the network to overview connected devices, rogue hosts and network load. 
- **Packets reassembling:** Reassembling the packets to investigate the traffic flow. This use case is helpful in unencrypted traffic flows.
- **Data leakage detection:** Reviewing packet transfer rates for each host and destination address helps detect possible data leakage. 
- **Anomaly and malicious activity detection:** Reviewing overall network load by focusing on used ports, source and destination  addresses, and data helps detect possible malicious activities along  with vulnerabilities. This use case covers the correlation of indicators and hypotheses as well.
- **Policy/Regulation compliance control:** Reviewing overall network behaviour helps detect policy/regulation compliance.

## Advantages of network forensics

- **Availability of network-based evidence in the wild:** Capturing network traffic is collecting evidence, so it is easier than other  types of evidence collections such as logs and IOCs.
- **Ease of data/evidence collection without creating noise:** Capturing and working with network traffic is easier than investigating  unfiltered events by EDRs, EPPs and log systems. Usually, sniffing  doesn't create much noise, logs and alerts. The other thing is that  network traffic is not destructible like logs and alerts generated by  security systems.
- **It is hard to destroy the network evidence, as it is the transferred data:** Since the evidence is the traffic itself, it is impossible to do anything  without creating network noise. Still, it is possible to hide the  artefacts by encrypting, tunnelling and manipulating the packets. So,  the second fact is the challenge of this advantage.
- **Availability of log sources:** Logs provide valuable information which helps to correlate the chain of  events and support the investigation hypothesis. The majority of the  EDRs, EPPs and network devices create logs by default. Having log files  is easy if the attacker/threat/malware didn't erase/destroy them.
- **It is possible to gather evidence for memory and non-residential malicious activities:** The malware/threat might reside in the memory to avoid detection. However,  the series of commands and connections live in the network. So it is  possible to detect non-residential threats with Network forensics tools  and tactics.

## Challenges of network forensics

- **Deciding what to do:** One of the most difficult challenges of Network forensics is "Deciding what to do". There are several purposes of carving networks; SOC, IH/IR and  Threat Hunting. Observing, trapping, catching, or stopping an anomalous  activity is also possible.
- **Sufficient data/evidence collection on the network:** One of the advantages of Network forensics is "Ease of collecting  evidence". However, the breadth of this concept poses a challenge. There are multiple points to consider in data/evidence collection.
- **Short data capture:** One of the challenges in data/evidence collection. Capturing all network  activity is not applicable and operable. So, it is hard always to have  the packet captures that covers pre, during and post-event.
- **The unavailability of full-packet capture on suspicious events:** Continuously capturing, storing and processing full-packets costs time and  resources. The inability to have full-packet captures for a long time  creates time gaps between captures, resulting in missing a significant  part of an event of interest. Sometimes NetFlow captures are used  instead of full-packet captures to reduce the weight of having  full-packet captures and increase the capture time. Note that  full-packet captures provide full packet details and give the  opportunity of event reconstruction, while NetFlow provides high-level summary but not data/payload details.
- **Encrypted traffic:** Encrypted data is another challenge of Network forensics. In most cases,  discovering the contents of the encrypted data is not possible. However, the encrypted data still can provide valuable information for the  hypothesis like source and destination address and used services.
- **GDPR and Privacy concerns in traffic recording:** Capturing the traffic is the same as "recording everything on the wire";  therefore, this act should comply with GDPR and business-specific  regulations (e.g. HIPAA, PCI DSS and FISMA ).
- **Nonstandard port usage:** One of the popular approaches in Network forensics investigations is  grabbing the low-hanging fruits in the first investigation step. Looking for commonly used patterns (like known ports and services used in  enumeration and exploitation) is known as grabbing the low-hanging  fruits. However, sometimes attackers/threats use nonstandard ports and  services to avoid detection and bypass security mechanisms. Therefor sometimes, this ends up as a challenge of Network forensics.
- **Time zone issues:** Using a common time zone is important for big-scale event investigation.  Especially when working with multiple resources over different time  zones, usage of different time zones create difficulties in event  correlation.
- **Lack of logs:** Network forensics is not limited to investigating the network traffic data.  Network devices and event logs are crucial in event correlation and  investigation hypotheses. This fact is known by the attackers/threats as well; therefore these logs are often erased by them, in order to make  the investigation more difficult.

## Sources of evidence

Capturing proper network traffic requires knowledge and tools. Usually, there is a single chance of gathering the 
live traffic as evidence. There are multiple evidence resources to gather Network forensics data:

- TAPS
- InLine Devices
- SPAN Ports
- Hubs
- Switches
- Routers
- DHCP Servers
- Name Servers
- Authentication Servers
- Firewalls
- Web Proxies
- Central Log Servers
- Logs (IDS/IPS, Application, OS, Device)

## Primary purposes of network forensics

- **Security Operations (SOC):** Daily security monitoring activities on system performance and health, user behaviour, and security issues.
- **Incident Handling/Response and Threat Hunting:** During/Post-incident investigation activities on understanding the reason for the incident,  detecting malicious and suspicious activity, and investigating the data  flow content.

## Investigated data types in network forensics

- **Live Traffic**
- **Traffic Captures (full packet captures and network flows)**
- **Log Files**

NetworkMiner is capable of processing and handling packet pictures and live traffic. Therefore, we will focus on live and captured traffic in this room.  Both of these data sources are valuable for forensics investigations. 

Traffic investigation actions fall under Network forensics "Traffic Analysis" subdomain. However, the main purpose of the NetworkMiner is to  investigate the overall flow/condition of the limited amount of traffic, not for a long in-depth live traffic investigation.

## NetworkMiner in a nutshell

| **Capability**                 | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                   |
|:-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Traffic sniffing**           | It can intercept the traffic, sniff it, and collect and log packets that pass <br>through the network.                                                                            |
| **Parsing PCAP files**         | It can parse pcap files and show the content of the packets in detail.                                                                                                            |
| **Protocol analysis**          | It can identify the used protocols from the parsed pcap file.                                                                                                                     |
| **OS fingerprinting**          | It can identify the used OS by reading the pcap file. This feature strongly <br>relies on[ Satori ](https://github.com/xnih/satori/)and [p0f](https://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/p0f3/). |
| **File Extraction**            | It can extract images, HTML files and emails from the parsed pcap file.                                                                                                           |
| **Credential grabbing**        | It can extract credentials from the parsed pcap file.                                                                                                                             |
| **Clear text keyword parsing** | It can extract clear-text keywords and strings from the parsed pcap file.                                                                                                         |

**We are using NetworkMiner free edition in this room, but a Professional  edition has much more features. You can see the differences between free and professional versions** [**here**](https://www.netresec.com/?page=NetworkMiner)**.**

## Operating modes

- **Sniffer Mode:** Although it has a sniffing feature, it is not intended to use as a sniffer. The  sniffier feature is available only on Windows. However, the rest of the  features are available in Windows and Linux OS. Based on experience, the sniffing feature is not as reliable as  other features. Therefor we suggest not using this tool as a primary sniffer. Even the official description of the tool mentions that this  tool is a "Network forensics Analysis Tool", but it can be used as a  "sniffer". In other words, it is a Network Forensic Analysis Tool with  but has a sniffer feature, but it is not a dedicated sniffer like  Wireshark and tcpdump.
- **Packet Parsing/Processing:** NetworkMiner can parse traffic captures to have a quick overview and information on  the investigated capture. This operation mode is mainly suggested to  grab the "low-hanging fruit" before diving into a deeper investigation.

## Pros and cons

### Pros

- OS fingerprinting
- Easy file extraction
- Credential grabbing
- Clear text keyword parsing
- Overall overview

### Cons

- Not useful in active sniffing
- Not useful for large pcap investigation
- Limited filtering
- Not built for manual traffic investigation

## Differences between Wireshark and NetworkMiner

NetworkMiner and Wireshark have similar base features, but are different in purpose. 

Best practice is to record the traffic for offline analysis, quickly overview the pcap with NetworkMiner and then use Wireshark for further investigation.

| **Feature**                 | **NetworkMiner**                                         | **Wireshark**     |
|:----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| Purpose                     | Quick overview, traffic mapping, <br>and data extraction | In-Depth analysis |
| GUI                         | **✅**                                                    | **✅**             |
| Sniffing                    | **✅**                                                    | **✅**             |
| Handling PCAPS              | **✅**                                                    | **✅**             |
| OS Fingerprinting           | **✅**                                                    | ❌                 |
| Parameter/Keyword Discovery | **✅**                                                    | Manual            |
| Credential Discovery        | **✅**                                                    | **✅**             |
| File Extraction             | **✅**                                                    | **✅**             |
| Filtering Options           | Limited                                                  | **✅**             |
| Packet Decoding             | Limited                                                  | **✅**             |
| Protocol Analysis           | ❌                                                        | **✅**             |
| Payload Analysis            | ❌                                                        | **✅**             |
| Statistical Analysis        | ❌                                                        | **✅**             |
| Cross-Platform Support      | **✅**                                                    | **✅**             |
| Host Categorisation         | **✅**                                                    | ❌                 |
| Ease of Management          | **✅**                                                    | **✅**             |
